[Security Solution] Array of scalar values diff algorithm test plan (#186325)
elastic/kibana: x-pack/plugins/security_solution/docs/testing/test_plans/detection_response/prebuilt_rules/upgrade_review_algorithms.md

- **Current version**: Also labeled as `current_version`. This is the version of the rule that the user currently has installed. If any modifications were made to the "out of the box" `base_version` of the rule they would be represented by the `current_version` of the rule.

- **Target version**: Also labeled as `target_version`. This is the version of the rule that contains the update from Elastic.

- **Merged version**: Also labeled as `merged_version`. This is the version of the rule that we determine via the various algorithms. It could contain a mix of all the rule versions on a per-field basis to create a singluar version of the rule containing all relevant updates and user changes to display to the user.

### Assumptions

- All scenarios will contain at least 1 prebuilt rule installed in Kibana.
- A new version will be available for rule(s).

## Scenarios

### Rule field doesn't have an update and has no custom value - `AAA`

> #### **Scenario: Rule field is any type**

Author: Trying to find a better name for all these scenarios that would be unique enough to use in a TOC, any suggestions?

Reviewer: While not perfect, I think adding a three-letter type should work.

```markdown
### Rule field doesn't have an update and has no custom value - `AAA`
#### **Scenario: AAA - Rule field is any type**
```

Yep, some duplication, but it's not too bad IMO.

And <field_name> field should be returned from the `upgrade/_review` API endpoint
And <field_name> field should be shown in the upgrade preview UI

CASE: array fields should work the same agnostic of order

Examples:
| algorithm          | field_name | base_version | current_version | target_version  |
| single line string | name       | "A"          | "B"             | "B"             |
| number             | risk_score | 1            | 2               | 2               |
| array of scalars   | tags       | ["A", "B"]   | ["A", "B", "C"] | ["A", "B", "C"] |
```

### Rule field has an update and a custom value that are NOT the same - `ABC`

#### **Scenario: Rule field is a number or single line string**

**Automation**: 2 integration tests with mock rules + a set of unit tests for the algorithms

```Gherkin
Given <field_name> field is customized by the user (current version != base version)
And <field_name> field is updated by Elastic in this upgrade (target version != base version)
And customized <field_name> field is different than the Elastic update in this upgrade (current version != target version)

> Then for <field_name> field the diff algorithm should output the current version as the merged one with a conflict

Reviewer: Do we want to mention the type of conflict (solvable / non-solvable) here or is it something that is going to be added in the later tickets?

Author: Yeah forgot to add those 👍

And <field_name> field should be returned from the `upgrade/_review` API endpoint
And <field_name> field should be shown in the upgrade preview UI

Examples:
| algorithm          | field_name | base_version | current_version | target_version  |
| single line string | name       | "A"          | "B"             | "C"             |
| number             | risk_score | 1            | 2               | 3               |
```

#### **Scenario: Rule field is an array of scalar values**

**Automation**: 1 integration test with mock rules + a set of unit tests for the algorithm

```Gherkin
Given <field_name> field is customized by the user (current version != base version)
And <field_name> field is updated by Elastic in this upgrade (target version != base version)
And customized <field_name> field is different than the Elastic update in this upgrade (current version != target version)

> Then for <field_name> field the diff algorithm should output a custom merged version with a solveable conflict

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then for <field_name> field the diff algorithm should output a custom merged version with a solvable conflict
```

And the base version of the rule cannot be determined
And customized <field_name> field is the same as the Elastic update in this upgrade (current version == target version)
Then for <field_name> field the diff algorithm should output the current version as the merged one without a conflict
And <field_name> field should not be returned from the `upgrade/_review` API endpoint
And <field_name> field should not be shown in the upgrade preview UI

CASE: array fields should work the same agnostic of order

Examples:
| algorithm          | field_name | base_version | current_version | target_version  |
| single line string | name       | N/A          | "A"             | "A"             |
| number             | risk_score | N/A          | 1               | 1               |
| array of scalars   | tags       | N/A          | ["A", "B", "C"] | ["A", "B", "C"] |
```

### Rule field has an update and a custom value that are NOT the same and the rule base version doesn't exist - `-BC`

#### **Scenario: Rule field is a number or single line string**

**Automation**: 2 integration tests with mock rules + a set of unit tests for the algorithms

```Gherkin

> Given at least 1 installed prebuilt rule is has a new version available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given at least 1 installed prebuilt rule has a new version available
```

And <field_name> field should be returned from the `upgrade/_review` API endpoint
And <field_name> field should be shown in the upgrade preview UI

Examples:
| algorithm          | field_name | base_version | current_version | target_version  |
| single line string | name       | N/A          | "B"             | "C"             |
| number             | risk_score | N/A          | 2               | 3               |
```

#### **Scenario: Rule field is an array of scalar values**

**Automation**: 1 integration test with mock rules + a set of unit tests for the algorithm

```Gherkin
Given <field_name> field is customized by the user (current version != base version)
And <field_name> field is updated by Elastic in this upgrade (target version != base version)
And customized <field_name> field is different than the Elastic update in this upgrade (current version != target version)
Then for <field_name> field the diff algorithm should output a custom merged version with a solveable conflict
And <field_name> field should be returned from the `upgrade/_review` API endpoint
And <field_name> field should be shown in the upgrade preview UI

> CASE: array fields should work the same agnostic of order

Reviewer: Does this mean that it's only applicable to some fields and for other fields order doesn't matter?

Author: Not sure if I understand the question, things that aren't array fields wouldn't have an order per say. This is basically saying that any fields that are arrays should perform the same no matter the order (e.g. an array of `["A", "B"]` would be treated the same by the algorithm as `["B", "A"]`).

Reviewer: Oh, I should have phrased it better. I meant do we have arrays where order matters and arrays where it doesn't?

And <field_name> field should be returned from the `upgrade/_review` API endpoint
And <field_name> field should be shown in the upgrade preview UI

Examples:
| algorithm          | field_name | base_version | current_version | target_version  | merged_version |
| single line string | name       | "A"          | "B"             | "C"             | "B"            |
| number             | risk_score | 1            | 2               | 3               | 2              |
```

#### **Scenario: `ABC` - Rule field is an array of scalar values**

**Automation**: 5 integration tests with mock rules + a set of unit tests for the algorithm

```Gherkin
Given <field_name> field is customized by the user (current version != base version)
And <field_name> field is updated by Elastic in this upgrade (target version != base version)
And customized <field_name> field is different than the Elastic update in this upgrade (current version != target version)
Then for <field_name> field the diff algorithm should output a custom merged version with a solvable conflict
And arrays should be deduplicated before comparison

> And arrays should be compared insensitive of case

Reviewer 2: We ended up changing the logic for this, as explained in [this thread.](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/186323#discussion_r1658805730) The diff should be case sensitive.

I would replace the last example for one that uses index patterns. In that case, it makes much more clear why it should be case-sensitive, as explained in the threat I linked above. We could have something like:

```
| algorithm        | field_name | base_version            | current_version         | target_version            | merged_version                 |
| array of scalars | index       | ["logs-*", "endgame-*", "endpoint-*"]   | ["Logs-*", "endgame-*"]          | ["logs-*", "endgame-*", "new-*"]         | ["Logs-*", "endgame-*", "new-*"]               |
| array of scalars | index       | ["logs-*"]   | ["logs-*", "Logs-*"]          | ["logs-*", "new-*"]         | ["logs-*", "Logs-*", "new-*"]               |
```

In the first case, "Logs-" would be preserved since it was added by the user, and "logs-" was removed by the user, so it does not appear in the final version.

In the second example, both are preserved, since they do not represent the same value to the algorithm.

Author: I can put it in the example, but `index` won't technically be covered by this algorithm as it's under the grouped data source field

And <field_name> field should be returned from the `upgrade/_review` API endpoint
And <field_name> field should be shown in the upgrade preview UI

Examples:
| algorithm          | field_name | base_version | current_version | target_version  | merged_version |
| single line string | name       | N/A          | "B"             | "C"             | "C"            |
| number             | risk_score | N/A          | 2               | 3               | 3              |
```

#### **Scenario: `-BC` - Rule field is an array of scalar values**

**Automation**: 1 integration test with mock rules + a set of unit tests for the algorithm

```Gherkin
Given <field_name> field is customized by the user (current version != base version)
And <field_name> field is updated by Elastic in this upgrade (target version != base version)
And customized <field_name> field is different than the Elastic update in this upgrade (current version != target version)
Then for <field_name> field the diff algorithm should output a custom merged version with a solvable conflict
And arrays should be deduplicated before comparison

> And arrays should be compared insensitive of case

Reviewer 2: correct to `sensitive`

# Diff Algorithms for `upgrade/_review` Endpoint

This is a test plan for the `upgrade/_review` endpoint diff algorithms that are a part of the larger prebuilt rules customization feature. These algorithms determine what fields get returned when a user makes an API request to review changes as a part of the rule update process and determine what version of those fields should be displayed by the UI.

Status: `in progress`.

## Table of Contents

- [Useful information](#useful-information)
  - [Tickets](#tickets)
  - [Terminology](#terminology)
  - [Assumptions](#assumptions)
  - [Non-functional requirements](#non-functional-requirements)
  - [Functional requirements](#functional-requirements)
- [Scenarios](#scenarios)

>   - [Rule field doesn't have an update and has no custom value - `AAA`](#rule-field-doesnt-have-an-update-and-has-no-custom-value---aaa) -[**Scenario: `AAA` - Rule field is any type**](#scenario-aaa---rule-field-is-any-type)

Reviewer 2: This is incorrectly formatted so it looks like this:

![image](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/assets/5354282/3c16d5b0-de86-47d4-ac8b-f7229c69d39c)

"-[**Scenario: `AAA` - Rule field is any type**]" is missing as space after the "-" in order to consider it as part of an unordered list. Also, it should be on its own line below, with an indentation.

Same for ABA.

    - [**Scenario: `-AA` - Rule field is any type**](#scenario--aa---rule-field-is-any-type)
  - [Rule field has an update and a custom value that are NOT the same and the rule base version doesn't exist - `-BC`](#rule-field-has-an-update-and-a-custom-value-that-are-not-the-same-and-the-rule-base-version-doesnt-exist----bc)
    - [**Scenario: `-BC` - Rule field is a number or single line string**](#scenario--bc---rule-field-is-a-number-or-single-line-string)
    - [**Scenario: `-BC` - Rule field is an array of scalar values**](#scenario--bc---rule-field-is-an-array-of-scalar-values)

## Useful information

### Tickets

- [Users can customize prebuilt detection rules](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/174168) epic
- [Implement single-line string diff algorithm](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/180158)
- [Implement number diff algorithm](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/180160)
- [Implement array of scalar values diff algorithm](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/issues/180162)

### Terminology

> - **Base version**: Also labeled as `base_version`. This is the version of a rule authored by Elastic and unchanged by a user. The algorithms use it as a point of reference to see if the rule is being updated at all in addition to seeing if the user has customized anything themselves

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Base version**: Also labeled as `base_version`. This is the version of a rule authored by Elastic as it is installed from the `security_detection_engine` package, with no customizations to any fields by the user.
```
Not sure about `The algorithms use it as a point of reference to check if the rule is being updated at all in addition to seeing if the user has customized anything themselves`. Whether the rule is being updated at all or not depends on a newer `version` of the rule being available, rather than the `base_version`.

> - **Current version**: Also labeled as `current_version`. This is the version of the rule that the user currently has installed. If any modifications were made to the "out of the box" `base_version` of the rule they would be represented by the `current_version` of the rule.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Current version**: Also labeled as `current_version`. This is the version of the rule that the user currently has installed. Consists of the `base_version` of the rules plus all customization applies to its fields by the user.
```
